What I saw Aaron Swartz do
==========================

*Daniel Chudnov, @dchud, Washington DC, 20003*

*January 23, 2013*

I learned about Aaron Swartz when I was working at MIT Libraries
in 2001.  He was co-writing the RSS 1.0 spec, which I was tracking
closely.  That fall, I met Aaron briefly at the O'Reilly P2P and
Emerging Tech conference in Washington DC.  I said hello and told
him I admired his work. He said "really?" and looked away awkwardly,
thanking me.  He was 14 years old.

Roughly around that time, I had been correspondending with Richard
Stallman, founder of the GNU software project and the Free Software
Foundation, about a free web encyclopedia he wanted to build that
anybody could edit.  Two other people were working on the same idea
at the same time, one of whom was named "Jimbo", and that effort
led to Wikipedia.  Aaron had been trying to build the same thing,
too, which led him to RSS.


First message to rss-dev
------------------------

   *August 14, 2000*

   > "How was the spec developed? Was it done through email discussion
   between the authors? If so, why did you choose this route, instead
   of a more public method? Would you be open to making the archives
   of this discussion available, so we could see the reasons behind
   some of the decisions?"

   [http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/rss-dev/message/2](http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/rss-dev/message/2)


   *August 15, 2000*

   > "Who wrote this spec? How did they get chosen? How did they write
   it? Will transcripts of that discussion be made available? Why
   did you choose a closed process rather than an open one?

   > Don't misunderstand - I'm very thankful for the work you've done,
   just curious why you've dropped a finished spec into our laps
   without asking for public input. I'd appreciate it if you could
   explain a bit more about the thinking behind the process."

   [http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/rss-dev/message/14](http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/rss-dev/message/14)

[RDF Site Summary (RSS) 1.0](http://web.resource.org/rss/1.0/) -
ubiquitous, alongside its more-recent successor, Atom, for over a
decade.


***

Markdown
--------

   *December 17, 2004*

   > "Aaron Swartz deserves a tremendous amount of credit for his
   feedback on the design of Markdown's formatting syntax. Markdown
   is much better thanks to Aaron's ideas, feedback, and testing.
   Also, Aaron's html2text is a very handy (and free) utility for
   turning HTML into Markdown-formatted plain text."

   [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/)

Markdown, widely used since 2004. Built in to github; we use it in
all our software projects at GW Libraries. This document is written
in Markdown.

***

web.py
------

   *December 6, 2005*

   > "The way I wrote web.py was simple: I imagined how things
   should work and then I made that happen. Sometimes making things
   just work takes a lot of code. Sometimes it only takes a little.
   But either way, that fact is hidden from the user — they just
   get the ideal API.

   > So how should things work? The first principle is that code
   should be clear and simple. If you want to output some text,
   you call web.output. If you want to get form input, you call
   web.input. There's nothing particularly hard to remember.

   > The second principle is that web.py should fit your code, not
   the other way around. Every function in web.py is completely
   independent, you can use whichever ones you want. You can put
   your files wherever you like, and web.py will happily follow
   along. If you want a piece of code to be run as a web app, you
   call web.run, you don't put your code in the magical place so
   that web.py can run you.

   > The third principle is that web.py should, by default, do the
   right thing by the Web. This means distinguishing between GET
   and POST properly. It means simple, canonical URLs which synonyms
   redirect to. It means readable HTML with the proper HTTP headers.

   > And that, as far as I'm concerned, are pretty much all the
   principles you need."

   [Rewriting Reddit](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rewritingreddit)

[web.py](http://webpy.org/) - still in wide use. Infogami and Reddit
used web.py, as did Open Library.

I wrote several apps over the years using web.py because it was
simple, and it worked just like he said it should.

***
      
Django magic removal
--------------------

   *December 6, 2005*

   > "While Django claims that it's "loosely coupled", using it
   pretty much requires fitting your code into Django's worldview.
   Django insists on executing your code itself, either through its
   command-line utility or a specialized server handler called with
   the appropriate environment variables and Python path. When you
   start a project, by default Django creates folders nested four
   levels deep for your code and while you can move around some
   files, I had trouble figuring out which ones and how.

   > Django's philosophy says "Explicit is better than implicit",
   but Django has all sorts of magic. Database models you create
   in one file magically appear someplace else deep inside the
   Django module with a different name. When your model function
   is called, new things have been added to its variable-space and
   old ones removed.  (I'm told they're currently working on fixing
   both of these, though.)

   > Another Django goal is "less code", at least for you. But Django
   is simply full of code. Inside the django module are 10 different
   folders and inside each of those are a few more."

   [Rewriting Reddit](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rewritingreddit)


   *May 1, 2006*

   > "The "magic-removal" branch made several sweeping changes to
   the Django codebase, removing warts that Django had accumulated
   over the years. Most changes involved the database API and
   removing some of its unneeded magic, and other changes involved
   improving the framework's simplicity and usability.

   > As of May 1, 2006, these changes have been integrated into the
   Django development version (Subversion's trunk), and were released
   officially in the following Django release, 0.95."

   [Removing the magic](https://code.djangoproject.com/wiki/RemovingTheMagic)

Aaron's comments focused Django's developers on making improvements
many people had scratched the surface at requesting but few had
articulated so clearly.  I've used Django successfully since these
very early days and the improvement from this work was dramatic.
I introduced Django at the Library of Congress in 2007 for WDL, and
since then it's been used on several other major projects at LC.
We use Django extensively here at Gelman; the Launchpad application
uses Django.


***

Who writes wikipedia?
---------------------

   *September 4, 2006*

   > "When you put it all together, the story become clear: an outsider
   makes one edit to add a chunk of information, then insiders make
   several edits tweaking and reformatting it. In addition, insiders
   rack up thousands of edits doing things like changing the name
   of a category across the entire site — the kind of thing only
   insiders deeply care about. As a result, insiders account for
   the vast majority of the edits. But it's the outsiders who provide
   nearly all of the content.

   > And when you think about it, this makes perfect sense. Writing
   an encyclopedia is hard. To do anywhere near a decent job, you
   have to know a great deal of information about an incredibly
   wide variety of subjects. Writing so much text is difficult, but
   doing all the background research seems impossible."

   > ...

   > "If Wikipedia is written by occasional contributors, then growing
   it requires making it easier and more rewarding to contribute
   occasionally. Instead of trying to squeeze more work out of those
   who spend their life on Wikipedia, we need to broaden the base
   of those who contribute just a little bit."

   ["Who Writes Wikipedia?](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)

Aaron's bid for election to the Wikimedia Foundation Board of
Directors fell short.  This analysis was widely read at the time;
see the surrounding essays (listed at the top of the link) for more
context.


***

Open Library
------------

   *February 27, 2008*

   > "The Open Library project (demo.openlibrary.org) is a collaboration
   between publishers, libraries, booklovers, and technologists to
   create a wiki with a page for every book. So far, we've been
   parsing Library of Congress records, ONIX feeds, Amazon pages,
   and more. And all the code and data used along the way is
   completely open."

   <iframe src="http://archive.org/embed/code4lib.conf.2008.pres.BuildingtheOpenLibrary" width="640" height="480" frameborder="0" allowFullScreen></iframe>

   [http://archive.org/details/code4lib.conf.2008.pres.BuildingtheOpenLibrary](http://archive.org/details/code4lib.conf.2008.pres.BuildingtheOpenLibrary)

I'd crossed paths with Aaron again at another O'Reilly conference
in 2007; I was excited to see him again, and we chatted a little.
When he gave a talk at code4lib 2008, a conference that I helped
to start, I was particularly excited: when you showed up at an event
and aaronsw was there, you knew you must be doing something meaningful.
When he focused in on the library world and library software and
metadata for a few years, building the Open Library, I was somewhat 
disdainful, thinking he was dabbling, and I passed on an opportunity
to dig in and help (which I was invited to).  I should've known better:
Aaron was the kind of person who followed through.

Today we use Open Library at GW Libraries to bring cover images of
books into our UIs for catalog search and retrieval, and we also
link to freely available copies of books in Open Library whenever
we can.  The cover images are used in both the proprietary vendor
product we use, Surveyor, as well as in our free/open source "landing
page" application, Launchpad.  Here's Launchpad example:

  [ex linking to open library](http://findit.library.gwu.edu/item/nnnn)


   *February 25, 2008*

        "Hey Aaron - we're here at the unconference and I'm wondering
        if I maybe never sent you the details about where and when.  If
        not, I'm sorry!  I must've assumed that you're on the lists and
        would have seen the details that way.

        We're at the embassy suites, room 103, near the main conference
        registration desk.  Stop by if you can!

        -Dan"

        "On Feb 25, 2008, at 12:39 PM, Aaron Swartz wrote:

        > Sorry, for some reason I had it down in my calendar as not starting
        > until this afternoon. My life has been blown to smithereens so I'll
        > try to pick up the pieces and make it over there when I can.

        Oh no - that sounds awful.  I hope whatever's happened is going
        to work out.

        If you can get over here, we'd be glad to see you, whenever."

         - personal correspondence


***

Guerrilla Open Access Manifesto
-------------------------------

   *July 2008*

   > "We need to take information, wherever it is stored, make our
   copies and share them with the world. We need to take stuff
   that's out of copyright and add it to the archive. We need to
   buy secret databases and put them on the Web. We need to download
   scientific journals and upload them to file sharing networks.
   We need to fight for Guerilla Open Access.

   > With enough of us, around the world, we'll not just send a
   strong message opposing the privatization of knowledge — we'll
   make it a thing of the past. Will you join us? "

   ["Guerilla Open Access Manifesto"](http://archive.org/stream/GuerillaOpenAccessManifesto/Goamjuly2008_djvu.txt)


***

"How we stopped SOPA"
---------------------

   <iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/Fgh2dFngFsg" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

   [F2C2012: Aaron Swartz keynote - "How we stopped SOPA"](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fgh2dFngFsg)
